what is the true nature of the universe
to answer this question humans come up
with stories to describe the world
we test our stories and learn what to
keep and what to throw away
but the more we learn the more
complicated and weird our stories become
some of them so much so that it's really
hard to know what they're actually about
like string theory
a famous controversial and often
misunderstood story about the nature of
everything
why did we come up with it and is it
correct or just an idea we should check
out
[Music]
to understand the true nature of reality
we looked at things up close and were
amazed
wondrous landscapes in the dust
zoos of bizarre creatures complex
protein robots
all of them made from structures of
molecules made up of countless even
smaller things atoms
we thought they were the final layer of
reality until we smashed them together
really hard and discovered things that
can't be divided anymore elementary
particles
but now we had a problem
they're so small that we could no longer
look at them
think about it what is seeing
to see something we need light an
electromagnetic wave
this wave hits the surface of the thing
and gets reflected back from it into
your eye
the wave carries information from the
object that your brain uses to create an
image
so you can't see something without
somehow interacting with it
seeing is touching an active process not
a passive one
this is not a problem with most things
but particles are very very very small
so small that the electromagnetic waves
we use to see aren't too big to touch
them
visible light just passes over them
we can try to solve this by creating
electromagnetic waves with more and much
smaller wavelengths but in quantum
physics shorter wavelengths means more
energy so when we touch a particle with
a wave that has a lot of energy it gets
a kick
by looking at a particle we change it in
quantum physics we cannot know where a
particle is and where it's going with
absolute precision this fact is so
important that it has a name the
heisenberg uncertainty principle the
basis of all quantum physics
so what does a particle look like then
what is its nature
[Music]
we don't know
if we look really hard we can see a
blurry sphere of influence but not the
particles themselves
we just know they exist
but if that's the case how can we do any
science with them
we did what humans do and invented a new
story a mathematical fiction
the story of the point particle
we decided that we would pretend that a
particle is a point in space
any electron is a point with a certain
electric charge and a certain mass all
indistinguishable from each other
this way physicists could define them
and calculate all of their interactions
this can be made precise in quantum
field theory and this solved a lot of
problems all of the standard model of
particle physics is built on it and it
predicts lots of things very well
some quantum properties of the electron
for example have been tested and are
accurate up to 0.000
so while particles are not really points
by treating them as if they were we get
a pretty good picture of the universe
not only did this idea advance science
it also led to a lot of real world
technology we use every day
but there's a huge problem gravity
in quantum mechanics all physical forces
are carried by certain particles
but according to einstein's general
relativity gravity is not a force like
the others in the universe
if the universe is a play particles are
the actors but gravity is the stage
to put it simply gravity is a theory of
geometry the geometry of space-time
itself of distances which we need to
describe with absolute precision
but since there is no way to precisely
measure things in the quantum world our
story of gravity doesn't work with our
story of quantum physics
when physicists tried to add gravity to
the story by inventing a new particle
their mathematics broke down
and this is a big problem
if we could marry gravity to quantum
physics and the standard model we would
have the theory of everything
so very smart people came up with a new
story they asked what is more complex
than a point
a line or a string
string theory was born
what makes string theory so elegant is
that it describes many different
elementary particles as different modes
of vibration of the string
just like a violin string vibrating
differently can give you a lot of
different notes a string can give you
different particles
most importantly this includes gravity
string theory promised to unify all
fundamental forces of the universe
this caused enormous excitement and hype
string theory quickly graduated to a
possible theory of everything
unfortunately string theory comes with a
lot of strings attached
much of the maths involving a consistent
string theory does not work in our
universe with its three spatial and one
temporal dimensions
string theory requires ten dimensions to
work out
so string theorists did calculations in
model universes
and then try to get rid of the six
additional dimensions and describe our
own universe
but so far nobody has succeeded and no
prediction of string theory has been
proven in an experiment
so string theory did not reveal the
nature of our universe
one could argue that in this case string
theory really isn't useful at all
science is all about experiments and
predictions if we can't do those why
should we bother with strings
it really is all about how we use it
physics is based on maths two plus two
makes four
this is true no matter how you feel
about it
and the maths in string theory does work
out
that's why string theory is still useful
imagine that you want to build a cruise
ship but you only have blueprints for a
small rowing boat
there are plenty of differences the
engine the materials the scale
but both things are fundamentally the
same things that
float so by studying the rowing boat
blueprints you might still learn
something about how to build a cruise
ship eventually
with string theory we can try to answer
some questions about quantum gravity
that have been puzzling physicists for
decades such as how black holes work or
the information paradox
string theory may point us in the right
direction
when used in this spirit string theory
becomes a precious tool for theoretical
physicists and help them discover new
aspects of the quantum world and some
beautiful mathematics
so maybe the story of string theory is
not the theory of everything
but just like the story of the point
particle it may be an extremely useful
story
we don't yet know what the true nature
of reality is but we'll keep coming up
with stories to try and find out until
one day hopefully we do know
this video was supported by the swiss
national science foundation and realized
with the scientific advice of alessandro
swandrini
[Music]
you